2. कृ पया मेरे परप व खाते म अितशेष रकम का मेरे बचत बक खाता सं यांक----------------------ि थत --------------------- (खाता कायालय का नाम) म यय कर । या कृ पया िडमांड ापाने वाले क े नाम चैक जारी कर या कृ पया नकद संदाय कर (लागू, यद रकम अनुेय सीमा से नीचे हो ) *मािणत कया जाता है क उपभोग क े िलए िनकासी /ऋण क े िलए मांगी रकम -------------------------------- क े योग क े िल है जो जीिवत है और अवय क है, अपेित है । जमाकतासंरक क े ह तार या अंगूठा छाप (लेखा कायालय को ात यि त ारा अंगूठा छाप मािणत क जानी चािह) संदाय आदेश (के वल कायालय क े योग हेतु) तारीख--------------------- संदाय यौरा मूल रकम प----------------------------------- (+) देय याज प--------------------------------------------- (-) अिधक संद त याज क वसूली प----------------------------- कटौती, यद कोई हो, प-------------------------------- कु ल देय रकम प---------------------------- प ------------------------------(अंको म) ---------------------------(श द म) का संदाय कर । तारीख------------------------------------------------------ पो मा रबंधक क े ह तार िनतारण द म) नकद चैकडीडी सं यांक ---------------तारीख- G.S.R. 914(E).In exercise of the powers conferred by section 3A of the Government Savings Promotion Act, 1873 (5 of 1873), the Central Government hereby makes the following Scheme, namely:- ---------------------खाता सं त क । 1. Short title and commencement.(1) This Scheme may be called the Sukanya Samriddhi Account Scheme, 2019. (जमाकता ारा भरा जा) प--------------------------(अंको म) -----------------------------(श यांक -------------को अंतरण ारा, ा जमाकतासंरक क े ह NOTIFICATION New Delhi, the 12th December, 2019 तारीख: तार या अंगूठा छाप - (2) It shall come into force on the date of its publication in the Official Gazette. 2. Definitions.(1) In this Scheme, unless the context otherwise requires,- - (a) 'account' means an account opened under this Scheme; - (b) 'account holder' means a girl child in whose name the account is held; - (c) 'Act' means the Government Savings Promotion Act, 1873 (5 of 1873); - (d) 'birth certificate' means birth certificate issued by the municipal authority or any office authorised to issue birth and death certificate by the Registrar of Births and Deaths or the Indian Consulate as defined in clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Citizenship Act, 1955 (57 of 1955); - (e) 'family' means a unit consisting of a person and his spouse (both or either of whom are alive or deceased) and their children, adopted or otherwise; - (f) 'financial year' means the period commencing on the 1 st day of April and ending on the 31 st day of March of the following year; - (g) 'Form' means forms appended to this Scheme; - (h) 'General Rules' means the Government Savings Promotion General Rules, 2018; - (i) 'maturity' means maturity of an account on completion of a period of twenty-one years from the date of its opening. - (2) Words and the expressions used herein but not defined shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the Act and the General Rules. 3. Opening of account.(1) The account may be opened by one of the guardian in the name of a girl child, who has not attained the age of ten years as on the date of opening of the account. - (2) Every account holder shall have a single account under this Scheme. - (3) The application in Form-1 for opening an account shall be accompanied by birth certificate of the girl child in whose name the account is to be opened, along with required documents of guardian. - (4) An account under this Scheme may be opened for a maximum of two girl children in one family: Provided that more than two accounts may be opened in a family if such children are born in the first or in the second order of birth or in both, on submission of an affidavit by the guardian supported with birth certificates of the twins/triplets regarding the birth of such multiple girl children in the first two orders of birth in a family: Provided further that the above proviso shall not apply to girl child of the second order of birth, if the first order of birth in the family results in two or more surviving girl children. 4. Deposits.(1) The account may be opened with a minimum initial deposit of two hundred and fifty rupees and in multiples of fifty rupees thereafter and subsequent deposits shall be in multiples of fifty rupees subject to the condition that a minimum of two hundred and fifty rupees shall be made as deposit in a financial year in one account. - (2) The total amount deposited in an account shall not exceed one lakh fifty thousand rupees in a financial year: Provided that the deposit in excess of one lakh fifty thousand rupees in any financial year, if accepted due to any accounting error, shall not be eligible for any interest and be returned immediately to the depositor. - (3) Deposits may be made in the account till the completion of a period of fifteen years from the date of opening of the account. - (4) An account in which minimum amount as specified in sub-paragraph (1) has not been deposited shall be considered as an account under default: Provided that an account under default may be regularised any time till completion of a period of fifteen years from the date of opening of account on payment of a penalty of fifty rupees for each year of default along with the minimum annual deposit in respect of the defaulted years. - (5) In case of an account under default, if not regularised within the time specified under sub-paragraph (4), then the whole deposit, including the deposits made prior to the date of default, shall be eligible for interest at the rate applicable to the Scheme till closure of the account. 5. Interest on deposit.(1) Deposits in the account shall earn interest at the rate 8.4 per cent per annum. - (2) The interest shall be calculated for the calendar month on the lowest balance in the account between the close of the fifth day and the end of the month. The interest shall be credited to the account at the end of each financial year and any amount of interest in fraction of a rupee shall be rounded off to the nearest rupee and for this purpose any amount of fifty paisa or more shall be treated as one rupee and any amount less than fifty paisa shall be ignored. - (3) Interest shall be credited at the end of the financial year irrespective of the change of the account office due to transfer of the account during the financial year. 6. Operation of account.(1) The account shall be operated by the guardian till the account holder attains the age of eighteen years. The account shall be operated by the account holder herself after attaining age of eighteen years by submitting necessary documents. 7. Premature closure of account.(1) In the event of death of the account holder, the account shall be closed immediately on application in Form-2, on production of death certificate issued by the competent authority and the balance at the credit of the account and interest due thereon till the date of death shall be paid to the guardian. - (2) Interest for the period between the date of death of the account holder and date of closure of the account shall be paid at the rate applicable on Post Office Savings Account for the balance held in the account. - (3) Where the accounts office is satisfied that in case of extreme compassionate grounds such as medical support in life-threatening diseases of the account holder or death of the guardian that the operation or continuation of the account is causing undue hardship to the account holder, it may, after complete documentation establishing the grounds for such closure, by order and for reasons to be recorded in writing, allow premature closure of the account. Outstanding balance in the account with interest due as applicable to the Scheme shall be paid to the account holder or guardian, as the case may be: Provided that no premature closure of an account under this sub-paragraph shall be made before completion of five years from the date of opening of the account. 8. Withdrawal.(1) On an application in Form-3, withdrawal of upto a maximum of fifty per cent. of the amount in the account at the end of the financial year preceding the year of application for withdrawal, shall be allowed for the purpose of education of the account holder: Provided that such withdrawal shall be allowed after the account holder attains the age of eighteen years or has passed tenth standard, whichever is earlier. - (2) The application for withdrawal under sub-paragraph (1) shall be accompanied by documentary proof in the form of a confirmed offer of admission of the account holder in an educational institution or a fee-slip from such institution indicating such financial requirement. - (3) The withdrawal under sub-paragraph (1) may be made in one lump sum or in instalments, not exceeding one per year, for a maximum of five years, subject to the ceiling specified in sub-paragraph (1): Provided that the amount of withdrawal shall be restricted to the actual requirement on account of fee and other charges required at the time of admission as shown in the offer of admission or the relevant fee-slip issued by the educational institution. 9. Closure on maturity.(1) The account shall mature on completion of a period of twenty-one years from the date of its opening. - (2) The closure of the account may also be permitted before completion of twenty-one years if the account holder on an application makes a request for such closure for the reason of intended marriage of the account holder on furnishing of a declaration duly signed on non-judicial stamp paper attested by the notary supported with proof of age confirming that the applicant will not be less than eighteen years of age on the date of marriage: Provided that no such closure shall be allowed before one month from the date of the intended marriage or after three months from the date of marriage. - (3) On an application in Form-4 by the account holder, the balance outstanding along with interest as applicable under paragraph 5 shall be payable to the account holder. 10. Application of General Rules.Provisions of the General Rules shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to the matters for which no provisions have been made in this Scheme. 11. Power to relax.Where the Central Government is satisfied that the operation of any of the provisions of this Scheme causes undue hardship to the account holder, it may, by order and for reasons to be recorded in writing, relax the requirement of that provision or provisions in respect of such account holder, in a manner not inconsistent with the provisions of the Act. [F. No. 2/2/2018-NS (Pt. I)] RAJAT KUMAR MISHRA, Jt. Secy. ## FORM - 1 [ See sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 3] (Application for opening an account) To The Postmaster/Manager ………………………………………………… ………………………………………………… Sir, I ………………………..(Applicant/guardian) hereby apply for opening of an account Account Scheme in your Post under\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_Sukanya Samriddhi Office/Bank. I tender herewith Rs……………………../- (Rs…………………………………………………………………………….) in cash/Cheque/DD. No………………… date………. as initial deposit. My particulars are as under:- 1. Name of the Depositor …………………………………………………………… Date of Birth ……… ..……… ……………… (DD / MM / YYYY ) (In words)………………………… 2. Name of Guardian …………………………………………………………… Husband/Father /mother's name …………………………………………………………… Date of Birth ……… ..……… ……………… (DD / MM / YYYY ) (In words)…………………………… 3. Aadhaar Number of guardian ………………………………………………………….. 4. Permanent Account Number (PAN) of guardian ………………………………………………………….. 5. Present Address …………………………………………………………. Paste photograph of applicant/s ………………………………………………… Permanent Address …………………………………………………………. …………………………………………………………. 6. Contact details Telephone Number……………………… Mobile Number…………………………… Email ID………………………………………… 7. Type of Account Minor 8. (*)Details of Birth Certificate of the depositor ………………………………………………………. - a) Certificate No. …………………………………………………………………….. - b) Date of Issue ……………………………………………………………………. - c) Issuing authority …………………………………………………………………… . 9. Details of other KYC documents attached 1. Proof of identification …………………………………………… 2. Address proof …………………………………………… (The following documents are accepted as valid documents for the purpose of identification and address proof: 1. Passport 2. Driving license 3. Voter's ID card 4. Job card issued by NREGA signed by the State Government officer 5. Letter issued by the National Population Register containing details of name and address; 10. The operation of the account will be:- (a) By the Guardian till the depositor attains majority. - (b) By the depositor herself on attaining majority, 11. Specimen Signatures 1………………………… 2……………………………. 3.,…………………………… (Name)………………………………………………………… I hereby declare that I have not opened a Sukanya Samriddhi Account in the name of the depositor mentioned at serial number 1 in any of the Post office/Bank in the country. I further declare that I and the depositor both are Resident citizen of India and undertake to inform the account office of any change in our residency/citizenship status in future. I hereby undertake to abide by the scheme provisions and Government Savings Promotion Rules, 2018 applicable on the Scheme and amendments issued thereto from time to time. Signature or thumb impression of guardian Date:…………………… ## Nomination 17. I…………………………………………..hereby nominate the person(s) mentioned below to whom to the exclusion of all other persons in the event of my death the amount standing to my credit in ……………………………………..(Name of Scheme) at the time of my death would be payable. S.No. Name(s) of the nominee(s) and relationship Full address (s) Aadhaar number of nominee (optional) Date of birth of nominee in case of minor Share of entitlement Nature of entitlement Trustee or owner 16 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II-SEC. 3(i)] 1 2 3 4 As the nominee(s) at Serial No.(s)…………………………..…….….specified above is/are minor(s), I appoint Shri/Smt/Kumari…………………………………S/o,D/o,W/o………………………………………………… ………………………..Address………………………………………………………………………………… …………………………………………………………………………….to receive the sum due under the said account in the event of my death during the minority of the nominee(s). 1. Signature of witness……………………………………. Name &amp; Address…………………………………………….. 2. Signature of witness……………………………………. Name &amp; Address…………………………………………….. Signature or thumb impression of guardian Place: Date: ## For use of Post Office/Bank The account has been opened in the name of…………………………………on……………………..with initial deposit of Rs………………………………………… with Account No.\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ dated\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. Customer identification Number……………………………….. Nomination has been registered vide No……………………………………..dated……………………………………….. Signature and seal of competent authority. ## FORM - 2 [ See sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 7] (Application for premature closure of account) To, The Postmaster/Manager ………………………………………………… ………………………………………………… Sir, 1. I wish to prematurely close my Account No\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ having balance of \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_(Rupees\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ Only) and request you to pay the amount after deduction of applicable penalty as per details given below:- Please Credit the amount to my SB Account No.\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ standing at\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_(Name of Account office). or Please issue a Demand Draft/account payee cheque or Please pay in cash (applicable if the amount is below permissible limit) 3. I hereby declare that the provisions under which the account can be closed before maturity have been complied with. Necessary documents as applicable are attached as under:- 1. 2. *Certified, that the amount sought to be withdrawn/loan to be availed is required for the use of ………………………………………who is alive and still a Minor. Date:-\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ Signature or thumb impression of depositor/guardian ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- (Thumb impression of the depositor should be attested by a person known to the accounts office) ## For office use only Payment detail Eligible balance in Account ' .\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ Less Penalty amount '.\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ Total Amount to be paid ' .\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_(In figures) (In words)\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ Date Stamp Signature of Postmaster/Manager -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ## Acquittance (to be filled by account holder/ messenger) Received Rs.\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_(In figures)\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ (in words) By cash/cheque/DD bearing No.)\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_dated\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_/by transfer to Account No\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. Date Signature/thumb impression of depositor/guardian ## FORM - 3 [ See sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 8] (Application for Withdrawal) To, The Postmaster/Manager ………………………………………………… ………………………………………………… Sir, I ……………………………………………………………..(Depositor/guardian) hereby apply for withdrawal from my account as per details below:- Account Number:........................................................................................ Amount of withdrawal applied........................................................... *Certified, that the amount sought to be withdrawn to be availed is required for the use of ………………………………………who is alive and still a Minor. 2. Please Credit the amount of withdrawal to my SB Account no.\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ standing at\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_(Name of Account office). or Please issue a Demand Draft/account payee cheque or Please pay in cash (applicable if the amount is below permissible limit of cash payment). 3. I certify that all the conditions applicable under scheme for grant of withdrawal have been complied with. Necessary documents as applicable are attached as under:- 1. 2. Date:-\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ Signature or thumb impression of depositor/guardian ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Attested By\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ (Attestation is applicable in case of thumb impression) For office use only Payment detail Amount available in Account Rs .\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ Date of Initial Subscription \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ Date on which last withdrawal was allowed \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ Total Amount granted for withdrawal Rs .\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_(In figures) (In words)\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ Date Stamp Signature of Postmaster/Manager -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ## Acquittance (to be filled by depositor) Received Rs .\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_(In figures)\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ (in words) By cash/cheque/DD bearing no…………………………………….dated…………………./by transfer to Account No............................... Date Signature/thumb impression of depositor/guardian FORM - 4 [ See sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 9] (Application for closure of account) Name of Post Office/Bank\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ Date\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ Account Number\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 1. I hereby submit pass book/deposit receipt book and apply for closure of my above mentioned account. 2. Please Credit the amount of eligible balance in my matured account to my SB Account no.\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ standing at\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_(Name of Account office). or Please issue a Demand Draft/account payee cheque or Please pay in cash (applicable if the amount is below permissible limit). *Certified, that the amount sought to be withdrawn/loan to be availed is required for the use of ………………………………………who is alive and still a Minor. Signature or thumb impression of depositor/guardian (Thumb impression should be attested by a person known to Accounts office) ## Payment Order (For office use only) Date ................................ ## Payment detail Principal amount Rs.\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ - (+) Interest due Rs. \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ - (-) Recovery of overpaid interest Rs.\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ Deduction if any Rs \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ Total Amount due Rs\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ Pay Rs.\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_(in figurers)\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_(in words) Date Signature of Postmaster/Manager ## Acquittance (to be filled by depositor) Received Rs .\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_(In figures)\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ (in words) By cash/cheque/DD bearing no…………………………………….dated…………………./by transfer to Account No............................... Date Signature/thumb impression of depositor/guardian अिधसूचना नई द ली, 12 दस बर, 2019 सा.का.िन. 915(अ).- के ीय सरकार, सरकारी बचत संवधन अिधिनयम, 1873 (1873 का 5) क धारा 3क ारा द शियो ँ का योग करते , िनिलिखत कम बनाती है, अथात् :-